---
layout: note
title: April to June 2016
location: 
category: bookshelf
permalink: /bookshelf/april-to-june-2016
description:
---

## Night at the Crossroads by Georges Simenon

_Inspector Maigret #6_

Maigret investigates a murder at the remote Three Widows crossroads.

## The Hanged Man of Saint-Pholien by Georges Simenon

_Inspector Maigret #3_

Maigret travels from Paris to Leige to solve the mystery of a suicide which
seems only to be about a suitcase containing an old suit.

## Advanced Marathoning by Pete Pfitzinger  

Read for the second time as I prepared to run Manchester in April, the
Pfitzinger plan is now a key part of my yearly training. For now I've only done
the lowest mileage (80 km per week) of the brutal training regimes, but even
that moved my distance running on massively.

Along with the weekly plans, the chapters on physiology at the start helped me
to understand how each of the many track sessions, intervals and long weekend
runs develop $\mathrm{max(\dot{V}O_2)}$, lactate threshold and glycogen storage
on the way to race fitness.

## High Quality Software Engineering by David Drysdale

_Lessons from the Six-Nines World._ 

This free book available from [Drysdale's homepage][0] drew me in with the
perspective  offered in that subhead &mdash; six-nines meaning 99.9999% uptime,
or 31 seconds downtime per year. It covers the main areas of software
engineering: design, coding, reviews and testing, and declares three themes:
'maintainability', 'knowing reasons why' and 'developing developers'.

For me the most useful sections were on designing for scale and reliability and
on testing strategies. Not so useful were those on project management, which
felt dated. The list of technical fundamentals near the back will serve as a
good to-do list for me.

[0]: http://lurklurk.org/
