---
layout: note
title: Book Notes, April to June 2016
location:
category: bookshelf
published: false
permalink: /bookshelf/april-to-june-2016
description:
---

1. _Night at the Crossroads (Maigret #6)_ by Georges Simenon --- Maigret
   investigates a murder at the remote Three Widows crossroads.

1. _The Hanged Man of Saint-Pholien (Maigret #3)_ by Georges Simenon --- Maigret
   travels from Paris to Leige to solve the mystery of a suicide which seems
   only to be about a suitcase containing an old suit.

1. _Advanced Marathoning_ by Pete Pfitzinger --- Read for the second time as I
   prepared to run Manchester in April, the Pfitzinger plan is now a key part of
   my yearly training. For now I've only done the lowest mileage (80 km per
   week) of the brutal training regimes, but even that moved my distance running
   on massively.

   Along with the weekly plans, the chapters on physiology at the start helped
   me to understand how each of the many track sessions, intervals and long
   weekend runs develop VO2 max, lactate threshold and glycogen storage on the
   way to race fitness.

1. _High Quality Software Engineering_ by David Drysdale --- This free book
   available from [Drysdale's homepage][0] drew me in with the perspective
   offered of _Lessons from the Six-Nines World_, six-nines meaning 99.9999%
   uptime or 31 seconds downtime per year. It covers the main areas of software
   engineering: design, coding, reviews and testing, and declares three themes:
   _maintainability_, _knowing reasons why_ and _developing developers_.

   For me the most useful sections were on designing for scale and reliability
   and on testing strategies. Not so useful were those on project management,
   which felt dated. The list of technical fundamentals near the back will serve
   as a good to-do list for me.

[0]: http://lurklurk.org/
