---
layout: note
title: Book Notes, 2016
location:
category: bookshelf
published: true
permalink: /book-notes-2016/
redirect_from:
  - /the-crossing-cormac-mccarthy
---

1. _A Short History of Nearly Everything_ by Bill Bryson

2. _Getting Things Done_ by David Allen

3. _Creativity, Inc._ by Amy Wallace, Edwin Catmull

1. _Night at the Crossroads (Maigret #6)_ by Georges Simenon --- Maigret
   investigates a murder at the remote Three Widows crossroads.

1. _The Hanged Man of Saint-Pholien (Maigret #3)_ by Georges Simenon --- Maigret
   travels from Paris to Leige to solve the mystery of a suicide which seems
   only to be about a suitcase containing an old suit.

1. _Advanced Marathoning_ by Pete Pfitzinger --- Read for the second time as I
   prepared to run Manchester in April, the Pfitzinger plan is now a key part of
   my yearly training. For now I've only done the lowest mileage (80 km per
   week) of the brutal training regimes, but even that moved my distance running
   on massively.

   Along with the weekly plans, the chapters on physiology at the start helped
   me to understand how each of the many track sessions, intervals and long
   weekend runs develop VO2 max, lactate threshold and glycogen storage on the
   way to race fitness.

1. _High Quality Software Engineering_ by David Drysdale --- This free book
   available from [Drysdale's homepage][0] drew me in with the perspective
   offered of _Lessons from the Six-Nines World_, six-nines meaning 99.9999%
   uptime or 31 seconds downtime per year. It covers the main areas of software
   engineering: design, coding, reviews and testing, and declares three themes:
   _maintainability_, _knowing reasons why_ and _developing developers_.

   For me the most useful sections were on designing for scale and reliability
   and on testing strategies. Not so useful were those on project management,
   which felt dated. The list of technical fundamentals near the back will serve
   as a good to-do list for me.


1. _Capitalism_ by James Fulcher --- A brief review of capitalism's history, its
   emergence in Europe and current global reach. The most interesting chapter
   for me is the comparison between different models taken in the United States,
   Japan and Sweden. On the latter:

   > The labour movement’s leadership recognized that welfare depended not just
   on the strength of socialist ideas and working class organization but also on
   the operation of a dynamic capitalist economy that could compete
   internationally and increase the size of the national economic cake. It was
   one of the central principles of Swedish economic policy that unprofitable
   companies should be allowed to go bankrupt, so that their resources could be
   transferred to profitable sectors of the economy. Swedish workers were in
   this respect rather less protected than British workers by government
   interventions to bail out failing companies. Furthermore, the
   union-controlled labour market policy did not protect jobs but assisted
   workers to become mobile and retrain.

1. _The Crossing_ by Cormac McCarthy {% include star.html %} --- The second book
   in the Border Trilogy is a story of three crossings of the Texas border by
   the teenaged Billy Parham. The first is a dreamlike journey to return a wild,
   pregnant wolf to its Mexican mountain home, the second and third follow in
   fate and circumstance.

   > The horse raising its head above the skyline to listen among the
   constellations and then bending to graze again. He studied those worlds
   sprawled in their pale ignitions upon the nameless night.

   I can never get enough of McCarthy's runaway sentences and the made-up words
   that sound right as soon as you read them: 'the godmade sun', 'the mute and
   footsore dog', 'the needlethin sweepsecond hand sectoring the dial'. The best
   are often saved for his keen-eyed attention to the animals.

1. _The Secret History_ by Donna Tartt {% include star.html %} --- Pretty sure
   if I'd read this novel before 2012 I would not have spent the next three
   years living with classicists.


1. _Prisoners of Geography_ by Tim Marshall {% include star.html %} --- With our
   century's aircraft, internet and supranational institutions, we may be
   tempted to think we've overcome the bounds of physical geography in global
   affairs. Our history is told in ideologies and leaders, good or bad.

    > There is on the globe one single spot, the possessor of which is our
    natural and habitual enemy. It is New Orleans. --- Thomas Jefferson

   Marshall shows us that plains, rivers and mountains are still predominant in
   ten examples from around the world with corresponding maps. He explains why
   Tibet is important to China, why Russia cares so much about the north
   European plain, and why with the Louisiana Purchase complete, the United
   States was destined to be a superpower.

    He might overstate the case a bit but as I never see this kind of analysis
    &mdash; only discussion of what Putin or Trump has said today &mdash; it's a
    refreshing way of looking at things. It's a shallow dive but comes with a
    decent bibliography to dig in further, which I intend to do.

1. _Open City_ by Teju Cole --- Open City follows the wandering thoughts of
   Julius on long walks around Manhattan. I put it on a reading list about New
   York I researched before visiting last October, then bought it from the
   geographically arranged shelves of McNally Jackson. So I expect the book will
   always remind me of that city, though the story resists ties of place.

   I put it down after a few pages. Nobody thinks like Julius, joining dots
   between Bach, Nietzsche, Auden, Mahler. I picked it up again and realised
   that the connection of ideas, people, places was the point. We might be at
   Ground Zero one moment and the Nigeria of his childhood next, or talking to a
   Moroccan writer in a Brussels internet café. We're in Julius' head. That's
   all novels, but the fluency here makes it work.

   I heard the citizen of the world is a 'citizen of nowhere'. Cole reminds us
   that art and people transcend nations. 'I'm on a road to nowhere. [There's a
   city in my mind][1].'

1. _Mindset_ by Carol Dweck --- The most obvious criticism you can give Mindset
   is that Dweck takes 250 pages to explain a thesis that can be given in a
   couple of sentences: We should stop with the old debates of nuture versus
   nature, genes versus environment, as research shows a greater indicator of
   success is our approach to abilities. In broad strokes: we may have a _fixed
   mindset_ and consider our qualities to be set, or a _growth mindset_ and
   believe that our qualities can be developed through effort. Guess which works
   best.

   Importantly, the growth midset itself can be developed. Dweck is a research
   psychologist, and cites convincing studies to back up the argument, though
   none look at long-term effect. The rest of the book is given to examples from
   sports and business and sweeping, mostly obvious advice for applying mindsets
   to work, relationships and parenting.

   > I've missed more than 9,000 shots in my career. I've lost almost 300
   games. 26 times, I've been trusted to take the game-winning shot and missed.
   I've failed over and over and over again in my life. And that is why I
   succeed. --- Michael Jordan

   It's such a broad thesis that I suspect it's easy to find examples to back it
   and hard to disprove. I'd say the most valuable advice in the book is this:
   don't praise children for ability or talent. You'll leave them fearing
   eventual failure, that you'll see them turn out not to be no genius after all
   and be forever disappointed. Instead praise their successes for the effort
   and work that went into them.

1. _Travels with Charley_ by John Steinbeck --- In 1960, at 58, Steinbeck makes
   a months-long tour around America with his French poodle Charley in a
   modified camper truck. He wants to see what's changed in the years he's been
   in Europe and New York. What he finds isn't always positive: radio's the same
   everywhere, some hitchhikers are racist. But for the most part his account of
   the open road and the the characters he finds on it is warm.

1. _My Ántonia_ by Willa Carther {% include star.html %} --- A tough, romantic
   tale of the immigrant life of early settlers on the Nebraska plain in the age
   of the Homestead Act.

   > There seemed to be nothing to see; no fences, no creeks or trees, no hills
   or fields. If there was a road, I could not make it out in the faint
   starlight. There was nothing but land: not a country at all, but the material
   out of which countries are made.

   Ántonia is a truly well-written character, and Carther is a master at both
   people and landscapes.

   > I was something that lay under the sun and felt it, like the pumpkins, and
   I did not want to be anything more. I was entirely happy. Perhaps we feel
   like that when we die and become a part of something entire, whether it is
   sun and air, or goodness and knowledge. At any rate, that is happiness; to be
   dissolved into something complete and great. When it comes to one, it comes
   as naturally as sleep.

1. _Turing's Cathedral_ by George Dyson --- An early history of the Institute
   for Advanced Study at Princeton. Dyson has a good perspective from which to
   tell this story, as he grew up there while his father Freeman Dyson was a
   fellow.

   Though it is Turing's name in the title, the book centres on the work of the
   Hungarian polymath John von Neumann, in the United States, to build the
   general-purpose ENIAC computer in the years up to 1946. Von Neumann, Teller
   and other hawks thought the best route to world peace was a 'preventive'
   hydrogen bomb strike on the Soviet Union, and the computer was intended to
   use their newly-invented Monte Carlo methods to simulate thermonuclear
   explosion. Thankfully that particular bomb was never dropped, peaceful uses
   for the computer were found in biology and meteorology, and the result of the
   von Neumann architecture is the digital world we now live in.

   > In some sort of crude sense which no vulgarity, no humor, no overstatement
   can quite extinguish, the physicists have known sin; and this is a knowledge
   which they cannot lose. --- Robert Oppenheimer

[0]: http://lurklurk.org/

[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWtCittJyr0
  