---
layout: note
title: Book Notes, April to June 2017
location:
category: bookshelf
published: false
permalink: /bookshelf/april-to-june-2017
description:
---

1. _Christianity_ by Linda Woodhead --- It's strange when I read histories of
   Christianity having spent my childhood in one branch of it. Things I think I
   know well seen from a different angle. In fact though she covers most
   churches, Woodhead doesn't mention JWs.

   Most interesting in this brief review was to read about the early divide in
   church versus biblical Christianity. Also the role of mystical Christianity
   and the Catholic church's successful absorption of the monastic movement to
   bring it under its own control.

1. _Deep Work_ by Cal Newport {% include star.html %} --- This book felt
   important,    and I just counted the number of passages I've added to my
   notes from it:  94, which is maybe a record. This is close enough to the
   central thesis:

    > The ability to perform deep work is becoming increasingly rare at exactly
    the same time it is becoming increasingly valuable in our economy. As a
    consequence, the few who cultivate this skill, and then make it the core of
    their working life, will thrive.

   And this from a section on life satisfaction:

    > Most people assumed (and still do) that relaxation makes them happy. We want
    to work less and spend more time in the hammock. But the results from
    Csikszentmihalyi’s ESM studies reveal that most people have this wrong. The best
    moments usually occur when a person’s body or mind is stretched to its limits in
    a voluntary effort to accomplish something difficult and worthwhile.

1. _The Yellow Dog (Maigret #6)_ by Georges Simenon --- A typical Maigret
   setting of a murder and a conspiratorial group of men in a small French town,
   this time Concarneau. Maigret sorts it all out with a few frothy beers of
   course.

1. _Cities of the Plain_ by Cormac McCarthy --- The last in the Border Trilogy
   brings John Grady Cole and Billy Parham together soon after the Second World
   War, in work on a ranch. The Old Testament Cities of the Plain were Sodom and
   Gomorrah, so we know the old world is in fire and brimstone. They make the
   crossing of the Rio Grande once more to find the last of it. As always
   McCarthy writes horses better than women.

   > The man smiled at him a sly smile. As if they knew a secret between them,
   these two. Something of age and youth and their claims and the justice of
   those claims. And of their claims upon them. The world past, the world to
   come. Their common transciencies. Above all a knowing deep in the bone that
   beauty and loss are one.

   Also this, from [the New York Times review][nytcm]:

   > That brief moment between a culture's existence and extinction -- this is
   the border that McCarthy's characters keep crossing and recrossing, and the
   one story, as he's forever writing, that contains all others. Throughout the
   trilogy, we keep encountering witnesses -- former revolutionaries, priests,
   gypsies -- in whose testimony alone human history survives. As in Proust, the
   storytellers are inseparable from their tales.


1. _The Spanish Civil War_ by Helen Graham --- I'm putting together a reading
   pile on the Spanish Civil War, and I like these short intros for a place to
   start. I'd never considered that there's no Civil War museum, though maybe in
   Barcelona soon. Francoists "always referred to the war as a 'crusade' or
   'fight for national liberation'". A reminder how quickly people can turn to
   killing their own neighbours, even relatives, when scared and told these
   people are the danger. Britain's non-intervention.

   > The military coup unleashed what was in effect a series of culture wars:
   urban culture and cosmopolitan lifestyles versus rural tradition, secular
   against religious; authoritarianism against liberal political cultures;
   centre versus periphery; traditional gender roles versus the 'new woman';
   even youth against age, since generational conflicts were also present.

   New culture war, same as the old culture war.

1. _Men Without Women_ by Ernest Hemingway --- This second set of stories was
   published in 1927. It's the one with _Hills Like White Elephants_ and _The
   Killers_. The stories flow through the gaps, and you know he's reporting life
   where he's seen it, whether bullfighting in _The Undefeated_, boxing in
   _Fifty Grand_ or war on the Italian Front in _Now I Lay Me_ and _In Another
   Country_.

   In [an interview, later][nyeh]:

   > I can remember feeling so awful about the first war that I couldn’t write
   about it for ten years,” he said, suddenly very angry. “The wound combat
   makes in you, as a writer, is a very slow-healing one. I wrote three stories
   about it in the old days—‘In Another Country,’ ‘A Way You’ll Never Be,’ and
   ‘Now I Lay Me.’

1. _The Goldfinch_ by Donna Tartt {% include star.html %}  --- This and _The
   Secret History_ are two of the most enjoyable novels I can remember reading
   in a long time. Recommended by everyone, and now by me.

   > Caring too much for objects can destroy you. Only–if you care for a thing
   enough, it takes on a life of its own, doesn’t it? And isn’t the whole point
   of things—beautiful things—that they connect you to some larger beauty?

1.  _Wind, Sand and Stars_ by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry --- _Saint-Ex_ wrote this
    memoir of his daring adventures as an early aviator for the French
    Aéropostale, expanding into his thoughts on friendship, death and living a
    meaningful life. He was a pioneer of the mail routes over the Sahara and the
    Andes. In undependable aircraft, over mountain terrain with navigation by
    landmarks on the ground or the stars at night, this was a perilous
    occupation.

    > Nothing, in truth, can ever replace a lost companion. Old comrades cannot
    be manufactured. There is nothing that can equal the treasure of so many
    shared memories, so many bad times endured together, so many quarrels,
    reconciliations, heartfelt impulses. Friendships like that cannot be
    reconstructed. If you plant an oak, you will hope in vain to sit soon under
    its shade. For such is life. We grow rich as we plant through the early
    years, but then come the years when time undoes our work and cuts down our
    trees. One by one our comrades deprive us of their shade, and within our
    mourning we always feel now the secret grief of growing old.

[nytcm]: http://www.nytimes.com/books/98/05/17/reviews/980517.17moslet.html
[nyeh]: http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1950/05/13/how-do-you-like-it-now-gentlemen
