---
layout: note
title: Book Notes, 2018
location:
category: bookshelf
published: true
permalink: /book-notes-2018/
redirect_from:
    - /bookshelf/january-to-march-2018
    - /bookshelf/april-to-june-2018
    - /bookshelf/july-to-september-2018
    - /bookshelf/october-to-december-2018
---

1. _Sapiens_ by Yuval Noah Harari --- A wide-lens look at human history,
   particularly at biology and culture. One of the most interesting arguments is
   that the agricultural revolution promoted huge population growth, and was
   thus successful for the species, but made the lives of individual _homo
   sapiens_ worse than when they had been hunter gatherers. The same claim may
   be made for the industrial revolution. Once such an upheaval has happened,
   there's no way back.
 
2. _Rolling Blackouts_ by Sarah Glidden --- Two youngish American journalists
   tour Turkey, Syria and Iraq, looking for stories. Glidden, the author and
   cartoonist of this graphic novel, tags along to document the trip. So does
   another friend, a former US marine who served in Iraq and has his own view on
   things. It’s poignant to read the stories of Iraqi families who found refuge
   in Syria, realising that in the time since this was written their lives have
   no doubt been in danger and turmoil all over again.
 
3. _Silence_ by Erling Kagge --- Not a deep read, but reminded me that one of
   the great benefits of long distance running or walking is spending time in
   your own head.
 
4. _Everything and More_ by David Foster Wallace --- A history of infinity, in
   particular the work of Georg Cantor. Wallace tries to cut down on the amount
   of repetition in mathematical writing with a lot of abbreviations, but I
   found this slowed down the reading rather than help. The book claims to be
   readable without some background in maths. As in the case of Penrose’s
   _The Road to Reality_ I think even if that were true it would not be a
   fun read. If you've studied some mathematical foundations, I recommend.
 
5. _Seveneves_ by Neal Stephenson --- I’ve long thought if I ever got into
   sci-fi, I’d get into it hard. This might be the book to do it.
   Saying that, the first two of the three parts are the ones I really enjoyed
   and they’re the ones that are set in the near future with some nice thinking
   about orbital mechanics. The third part, the real sci-fi bit, took a while
   for me to see the point of.
 
6. _Janesville_ by Amy Goldstein {% include star.html %} --- The modern history
   of one industrial city in Wisconsin. Janesville was the home of the Parker
   pen company and had the oldest General Motors factory in the US until it
   closed in 2008. The book follows a few of the residents affected by the plant
   closure over the following five years. These characters make concrete the
    problems of deindustrialisation: how tough it to lose the job you
   thought would be for life, how tough it is to retrain, to commute huge
   distances or move when property prices plummet.

7. _12 Rules for Life_ by Jordan B. Peterson --- Like any self-help book,
   there’s some pretty obvious stuff here that could be useful. Useful to me
   maybe. "Treat yourself like someone you are responsible for helping”, sure.
   Society is full of Pareto distributions, I don't feel this is widely
   understood and Peterson pushes on the idea. Be ready for a lot of Old
   Testament. There’s a weird bit where his example of good parenting is his
   ability to pin down a two year old. Nice one.

8. _Daniels' Running Formula_ by Jack Daniels --- Training plans from 800m to
   marathon with useful details on physiology, nutrition and recovering from
   injuries. The latter became the most important chapter this time as I got
   crocked halfway through a marathon programme.

9. _October_ by China Miéville --- A narrative look at the Russian Revolution
   between February and October 1917. There’s a lot of bureaucracy that is key
   to the story (so many committees) and it’s hard to make that interesting even
   for a storyteller like Miéville. His own politics must be considered,
   including admiration of Lenin, but he’s open about it.

10. _Aurora_ by Melanie Windridge --- This is a combination of a travelogue
    around Canada, Iceland, Scotland, Sweden, Norway (northern parts of the
    world where the auroral oval can be seen) and a pop science explainer.
    Windridge is a plasma physicist and does the explaining well. I thought I
    roughly understood the mechanism: solar wind hits magnetosphere, solar wind
    particles excited. I was close but wrong. 

    Here’s how I understand it after reading the book. Solar wind is plasma with
    a frozen-in magnetic field. The direction of the field can be pointing north
    or south as the sun spins and blasts out coronal mass ejections. When the
    solar wind hits the magnetosphere, the plasma is diverted around the Earth,
    and its frozen-in magnetic field is draped around the magnetosphere. There’s
    a clustering of field lines on the upstream (sun-side) of Earth, 60,000 km
    above the equator. If fields pointing in opposite directions are pushed
    close enough together, the  field plasma can break down and the magnetic
    configuration can change: field lines break and reconnect. There’s tension
    in the plasma, and the reconnection catapults plasma particles away and down
    the field lines. Energy is transferred from the field to the particles as
    they are accelerated to high speed. The particles collide with the upper
    atmosphere and its the atmospheric particles that are excited. So the aurora
    happens at the bottom of the field lines.

    I also learnt which transitions cause the different colours of the aurora
    and why they’re banded by height. Greens and reds are both transitions of
    oxygen. The decay lifetime of the green excitation is around a second, the
    red excitation lifetime is about two minutes. If there’s a collision with
    another molecule before the excited molecule has time to decay, the energy
    will be lost as heat and there won’t be colour emission. So the green
    transition is more common than the red. Also the red aurora tends to appear
    above 200 km (where there are fewer molecules to bump into) and the green
    aurora are lower at around 150 km. Pink and purple colours are due to
    transitions of nitrogen that have much shorter decay times and can be seen
    below 100 km.

11. _A Small Town in Germany_ by John le Carré --- I’ve been meaning to try a le
    Carré book for a while, and was immediately hooked on this one. Something
    between a spy novel and a mystery set in Bonn in the 60s.

12. _So Good They Can't Ignore You_ by Cal Newport {% include star.html %} ---
    'Follow your passion' is terrible advice.


13. _Empire_ by Stephen Howe --- Howe splits empires into those on land and
    those of sea. Land empires being those that grew by overland expansion,
    extending frontiers, like the Roman or the Ottoman. We maybe don’t even
    think of the ones that still exist as being empires, like the Russian,
    Chinese or American. The sea power empires are the European kind of the last
    500 years, the ones that really spread over the globe. The book mostly
    focusses on these, the impact and aftermath of that imperialism.

    > The economic balance sheet of colonialism, for both imperialist and
    > colonized countries, presents a hugely complex, mixed record: one over
    > which economic historians have long disputed, and will continue to do so.
    > […] In some, indeed, all the preconditions for future commercial and
    > industrial dynamism were present, as in India with its huge production of
    > textiles. Colonial rule destroyed these conditions where they existed, and
    > blocked the possibility of their emerging elsewhere. Colonized areas were
    > forced into acting as sources of underpriced raw materials for European
    > industry and of cheap, often forced or enslaved, labour. They were not
    > allowed to develop industries of their own, except in the few cases where
    > this suited European needs.
 
14. _How to Be Miserable_ by Randy J. Paterson --- I picked this up after
    watching [CGP Grey’s short video][grey], which I bet sold a lot of copies.
    Here’s Grey:
 
    > Aim toward the mirage of happiness rather than improving the ship upon
    > which you sail. Last, but most important, follow your instincts.
    > Navigation deeper into the sea of sadness is quite easy, for there is a
    > dark magnetic field that  points the compass of your impulses in the right
    > direction once you get started. You will want to stay indoors, you will
    > want to not exercise, you will want to sleep in, you will want to do what
    > you know will make you sadder after you've done it.
 
15. _The Bridge_ by Geert Mak --- The fifth, current, [Galata Bridge][galata] is
    not architecturally interesting but its location and history are remarkable.
    And the memory of [walking over it][istanbul] has stuck with me: a city of
    its own with its fishermen, street sellers, pickpockets and hustlers.

    Orhan Pamuk writes of the bridge in _The Museum of Innocence_ but I wondered
    who else had. The reason this book is a great read is that Mak spent the
    time to get the stories of the characters who make the bridge home, and
    passes these stories on with empathy.
 
16. _Why I'm No Longer Talking to White People About Race_ by Reni Eddo-Lodge
    --- Eddo-Lodge [says the title of this book comes from][eddo] 
    
    > The gulf of an emotional disconnect that white people display when a
    person of colour articulates their experience. You can see their eyes shut
    down and harden. It’s like treacle is poured into their ears, blocking up
    their ear canals. It’s like they can no longer hear us.

    There were plenty of times reading the book I felt that disconnect, felt the
    awkwardness of having to think about how that experience differs from mine.
    I spend close to zero time thinking about what it means to be white.
    Recommended.
 
17. _Call for the Dead_ by John Le Carré --- After _A Small Town in Germany_ I
    went back to the first of the Smiley novels.
 
18. _A Murder of Quality_ by John Le Carré --- The second Smiley novel is a
    murder thriller.
 
19. _The Spy Who Came In from the Cold_ by John Le Carré --- The third Smiley
    novel is back to espionage and to East Germany. OK, this one is really
    great. 


20. _The Mixer_ by Michael Cox --- A history of the Premier League in tactics,
    this starts by emphasising how much the back pass rule changed football. It
    stopped teams (notably Liverpool) using the back pass to kill games off when
    ahead. Defenders had to improve technically and goalkeepers had to become
    footballers. More exciting, especially on television.

    Cantona changes forward play, after which every team wants a foreign,
    mercurial number 10. Most are forgettable but then there’s Zola and
    Bergkamp. Arsené Wenger arrives, asking his chairman if fans would tolerate
    two foreign players in the team. Then the sprinter-finishers, Owen and
    Anelka. Reacting, clubs now need defenders to be fast too. Vialli lines up a
    Chelsea team with no British players, it’s a global show.

    English tactics still lag European leagues, but Alex Ferguson picks it up as
    United get better in the Champions league. He not only built different
    champion teams but also derived at least three entirely different strategies
    to get ahead of the league. Arsené built the Invincibles. Later, Mourinho
    and Benitez, similar in background and in their reactive play, study hours
    of video and adapt each game to target opponents’ weaknesses. Their
    introduction in the same season lowered scoring rates in the league. Then
    possession football, false nines, inverted wingers and assisters. Finally
    the pressers, Pochettino and Klopp. Defenders had to attack, now attackers
    have to defend.

    Football is never still. As soon as a winning strategy emerges,
    counterstrategies arrive to beat it. They usually arrive from abroad. I read
    this during the World Cup. The combination might be enough to get me
    interested in football again after years of only paying attention to the
    Reds.

21. _Enlightenment Now_ by Steven Pinker {% include star.html %} --- 

22. _The Looking Glass War_ by John Le Carré --- Up to the fourth Smiley novel
    now. Le Carre's world of Cold War espionage is dark, messy and
    psychological. His spies are not just fallible but self-interested and often
    mediocre. Good plot.

23. _Hackers and Painters_ by Paul Graham --- Graham is the co-founder of [Y
    Combinator][yc]. This collection of essays are from his blog so I’ve read
    some of them before. Some interesting examples are [Why Nerds are
    Unpopular][pg-nerds], [The Hundred Year Language][pg-100y] and [How to Make
    Wealth][pg-wealth]. The writing is good and editing tight, but they're
    mostly humourless. The ones on programming langauges are best. For a
    rebuttal to [the title essay][pg-hp], see that other programmer, painter and
    solid writer [Maciej Cegłowski][dabblers]. 
    
24. _Triumph of the City_ by Edward L. Glaeser {% include star.html %} --- I've
    lived most of my adult life in the centre of cities, not by accident.
    Harvard urban economist Edward Glaeser here makes the case for urban life.
    First, on the agglomeration effects that have made cities hubs of
    productivity through history.

    > Silicon Valley and Bangalore remind us that electronic interaction won’t
    make fact-to-face contact obsolete. The computer industry, more than any
    other sector, is the place where one might expect remote communication to
    replace person-to-person meetings.

    There's a chapter that looks at the decline of industrial cities, with an
    interesting observation on what made those cities vulnerable.

    > The industrial town was unlike either those old commercial cities or the
    modern capitals of the information age. Its vast factories employed hundreds
    of thousands of relatively unskilled workers. Those factories were
    self-sufficient and isolated from the world outside, except that they were
    providing the planet with vast quantities of cheap, identical products.

    Some cities have tried to build themselves back to success, which Glaeser
    argues is getting things the wrong way around. In fact, bulldozing might be
    a better, if unpopular, strategy.

    > Leipzig is worthy of emulation less for its cultural strategy than for its
    hard headed policy of accepting decline and reducing the empty housing
    stock. In 2000, one fifth of the city’s homes stock was vacant, a total of
    62,500 homes. Bulldozing vacant homes reduces the cost of city services,
    eliminates safety hazards, and turns decaying eyesores into usable space.
    Leipzig set a target of destroying 20,000 vacant units.

    The visibility of poverty in cities can give people the idea cities _cause_
    poverty but this is [wet streets cause rain][wscr] thinking.

    > Cities can be places of great inequality; they attract some of the world’s
    richest and poorest people. Although poverty can accompany urban decline,
    poverty often shows that a city is functioning well. Cities attract poor
    people because they’re good places for poor people to live.

    Maybe we should be more concerned about the cities where we don't see
    poverty.

    > The absence of poor people in an area is a signal that it lacks something
    important, like affordable housing or public transportation or jobs for the
    least skilled.

    Living in a city is far better for the environment than living in the
    countryside. I've learnt that people are surprised when you tell them this
    and can get offended if they happen to be people who've moved out to a shire
    and think they're saving the planet because they go once a month to an
    organic farmers' market. They drive there in a diesel of course, like they
    drive everywhere.

    What makes a succesful city? The book concludes with the standout example of
    Singapore, which provides a high quality of life and plenty of wealth for
    its citizens without having much in the way of natural resources. The
    drivers are a remarkably competent public sector and decades-long focus on
    education.

    > Education is, after January temperature, the most reliable predictor of
    urban growth.

25. _Energy_ by Richard Rhodes --- An ambitious and detailed trip through 400
    years of human energy production from wood burning through coal, oil,
    petrol, nuclear and renewable energy sources, looking at innovation and the
    impact on society and the environment.

    There are some great historical notes. I thought I knew well the story of
    Stephenson's first passenger railway from here in Manchester to Liverpool,
    but there is good detail on the ingenuity of floating the tracks over the
    swamp of Chat Moss and the invested interests Stephenson fought, from canal
    owners, carriage companies and wealthy landowners. The Earl of Sefton sent
    secret death threats, letting Stephenson know he'd have him thrown in a lake
    if he persisted in taking the railway through Sefton's estates.
 
26. _A Walk in the Woods_ by Bill Bryson --- I read a bunch of Bryson's travel
    books [in 2015][2015] but put this one off partly because I knew it'd just
    put in my head the idea of walking the Appalachian Trail and that's not a
    small thing to have in your head. It's about 3,500 km long, it'd take
    months. Anyway, now I want to walk the Appalachian Trail.

27. _Worth Dying For_ by Tim Marshall --- A world tour of national flags, and
    some others. There’s a bit of history on each and some interesting facts,
    like the eight places the Stars and Stripes is authorised to fly 24 hours a
    day, how Nato HQ rotates its flags every Sunday, and that the night sky
    shown in the Brazil flag is just as it would have been observed in Rio de
    Janeiro on 15 November 1889 at the time the monarchy was taken down.

    There’s brief mentions of how flags are used to unite and divide, including
    how the St George’s Cross gets co-opted by the far right in Britain and why
    the Confederate flag is still flown in the Southern US. But mostly it’s an
    interesting light read.

    Favourite flags? [South Korea][flag-sk], [Barbados][flag-b],
    [Seychelles][flag-sey], [Brazil][flag-br], [Vietnam][flag-v]. And
    [Nepal][flag-n] because yeah, enough rectangles.

28. _Madness Visible_ by Janine di Giovanni {% include star.html %} --- I made
    trips to Slovenia and Croatia this year, both beautiful, modern EU states. I
    picked this up in a bookshop in Dubrovnik: Di Giovanni's memoir of the
    Balkan Wars, which she covered on the ground for _The Times_. It's a
    harrowing firsthand account of the devestating reality of murder, torture
    and ethnic cleansing from Sarajevo, Kosovo, Pristina. Di Giovanni avoids
    political judgements, focusing on reporting war from the perspective of its
    victims.

    It's a reminder of the extreme danger faced by war correspondents.
    Subscribe to a newspaper that pays foreign correspondents or there'll be
    nobody there to report on such atrocities.

[flag-sk]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_South_Korea
[flag-b]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_Barbados
[flag-sey]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_Seychelles
[flag-br]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_Brazil
[flag-v]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_Vietnam
[flag-n]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_Nepal

[2015]: /bookshelf/2015

[2015]: /bookshelf/2015

[wscr]: https://calhounpress.net/blogs/blog/78070918-wet-streets-cause-rain-michael-crichton-on-the-gell-mann-amnesia-effect

[pg-nerds]: http://www.paulgraham.com/nerds.html
[pg-100y]: http://www.paulgraham.com/hundred.html
[pg-wealth]: http://www.paulgraham.com/wealth.html
[pg-hp]: http://www.paulgraham.com/hp.html
[yc]: https://www.ycombinator.com
[dabblers]: https://idlewords.com/2005/04/dabblers_and_blowhards.htm

[grey]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LO1mTELoj6o
[galata]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galata_Bridge
[istanbul]: /istanbul-apr-2012
[eddo]:  https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/may/30/why-im-no-longer-talking-to-white-people-about-race
