---
layout: note
title: Book Notes, 2020
location:
category: bookshelf
published: true
---

## Textbooks

<!-- 1. _All of Statistics_ by Larry Wasserman --- §7, 10, 11.

2. _The Algorithm Design Manual_ by --- 

3. _Hands-on Machine Learning_ by

4. _Learning Spark_ by  -->

## General Reading

1. _Himalaya_ by Michael Palin

2. _10:04_ by Ben Lerner

3. _Deep Work_ by Cal Newport {% include reread.html %} --- 

4. _Cat’s Cradle_ by Kurt Vonnegut

5. _No Country for Old Men_ by Cormac McCarthy --- The Coen Brothers' adaptation
    might be my favourite film, I've watched it so many times. I'd sort of saved
    this as a treat. The film stays close to the book.

6. _Solar_ by Ian McEwan

7. _Maigret’s Patience (Maigret #64)_ by Georges Simenon

8. _A Man’s Head (Maigret #9)_  by Georges Simenon

9. _The Glorious Cause_ by Robert Middlekauff

10. _God Save Texas_ by Lawrence Wright

11. _The Runner_ by Markus Torgeby

12. _Manchester Happened_ by Jennifer Nansubuga Makumbi --- A short story
    collection about Ugandans who move to Britain, specifically to Manchester,
    and about British Ugandans returning to Kampala. Obviously I enjoyed the
    references to the city I live in, like a wait at the bus stop outside Kro
    bar on Oxford Road, a scene I know well. Makumbi's range of characters
    explores some of the variance in people's experience of immigration, even to
    the same place. I'd say _Christmas is Coming_ is best.

13. _The Dancer at the Gia-Moulin_ by Georges Simonen (Maigret #10)

14. _The Wire_ by Rafael Alvarez

15. _World Order_

16. _The Perfect Spy_

17. _Cannery Row_ by John Steinbeck --- A character study of a place, Monterey
    in California, and Mack and the boys, pushed to the edge of society, and
    town, but still with a plan to make something happen.

18. _The Best We Could Do_

19. _Full Circle_ by Michael Palin

20. _The Power of Geography_ by Tim Marshall --- A sequel to _Prisoners of
    Geography_, with a shift of focus from geography's impact on historical
    events to now and the near future. I was reading the chapter on Australia,
    and how its military priority will always be need for a strong naval force,
    as news of the AUKUS alliance broke.[^aus]

    The chapters on Iran and Saudi Arabia can be read together as a battle
    for influence over a region, likewise Greece and Turkey.    

21. 

[^aus]: Did you know Beijing is closer to Dublin (~8,300 km) than it is to
    Canberra (~9,000 km)? Thanks again, Mercator projection. China is 'the
    superpower in Australia's backyard'.

<!-- Affiliate Links -->

[bs-big-sleep]: https://uk.bookshop.org/a/5340/9781618953292
